.TH "ARIA2C" 1 "October 2006" "aria2 0.8.1"

.SH NAME
.P
aria2c \- The high speed download utility

.SH SYNOPSIS
.TS
tab(^); l.
 aria2c [\fIoptions\fR] \fIURL\fR ...
 aria2c [\fIoptions\fR] \fB\-T\fR \fITORRENT_FILE FILE\fR ...
 aria2c [\fIoptions\fR] \fB\-M\fR \fIMETALINK_FILE\fR
.TE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
aria2 is a utility for downloading files. It has completely new design
concept from its predecessor, Aria, and is written from scratch.
aria2 has a segmented downloading engine in its core.
It can download one file from multiple URLs or multiple connections from one
URL. This results in very high speed downloading, much faster than ordinary
browsers. This engine in was implemented in a single\-thread model.
The architecture is clean and easy to extend. aria2 currently supports HTTP,
FTP, and BitTorrent. It also supports Metalink version 3.0.

.P
Please visit the project web site at \fIhttp://aria2.sourceforge.net\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-dir\fR=\fIDIR\fR
The directory to store downloaded file.

.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-out\fR=\fIFILE\fR
The file name for downloaded file.

.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log\fR=\fILOG\fR
The file path to store log. If '\-' is specified,
log is written to stdout.

.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Run as daemon.

.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-split\fR=\fIN\fR
Download a file using \fIN\fR connections. \fIN\fR must be
between 1 and 5. This option affects all URLs.
Thus, aria2 connects to each URL with
\fIN\fR connections.

.TP
\fB\-\-retry\-wait\fR=\fISEC\fR
Set amount of time in second between requests
for errors. Specify a value between 0 and 60.
Default: 5

.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-timeout\fR=\fISEC\fR
Set timeout in second. Default: 60

.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-max\-tries\fR=\fIN\fR
Set number of tries. 0 means unlimited.
Default: 5

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-proxy\fR=\fIHOST\fR:\fIPORT\fR
Use HTTP proxy server. This affects to all
URLs.

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-user\fR=\fIUSER\fR
Set HTTP user. This affects to all URLs.

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-passwd\fR=\fIPASSWD\fR
Set HTTP password. This affects to all URLs.

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-proxy\-user\fR=\fIUSER\fR
Set HTTP proxy user. This affects to all URLs

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-proxy\-passwd\fR=\fIPASSWD\fR
Set HTTP proxy password. This affects to all URLs.

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-proxy\-method\fR=\fIMETHOD\fR
Set the method to use in proxy request.
\fIMETHOD\fR is either 'get' or 'tunnel'.
Default: tunnel

.TP
\fB\-\-http\-auth\-scheme\fR=\fISCHEME\fR
Set HTTP authentication scheme. Currently, basic
is the only supported scheme.
Default: basic

.TP
\fB\-\-referer\fR=\fIREFERER\fR
Set Referer. This affects to all URLs.

.TP
\fB\-\-ftp\-user\fR=\fIUSER\fR
Set FTP user. This affects to all URLs.
Default: anonymous
.TP
\fB\-\-ftp\-passwd\fR=\fIPASSWD\fR
Set FTP password. This affects to all URLs.
Default: ARIA2USER@

.TP
\fB\-\-ftp\-type\fR=\fITYPE\fR
Set FTP transfer type. TYPE is either 'binary'
or 'ascii'.
Default: binary

.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-ftp\-pasv\fR
Use passive mode in FTP.

.TP
\fB\-\-ftp\-via\-http\-proxy\fR=\fIMETHOD\fR
Use HTTP proxy in FTP. \fIMETHOD\fR is either 'get' or
\&'tunnel'.
Default: tunnel

.TP
\fB\-\-lowest\-speed\-limit\fR=\fISPEED\fR
Close connection if download speed is lower than
or equal to this value(bytes per sec).
0 means aria2 does not care lowest speed limit.
You can append K or M(1K = 1024, 1M = 1024K).
This option does not affect BitTorrent download.
Default: 0

.TP
\fB\-\-max\-download\-limit\fR=\fISPEED\fR
Set max download speed in bytes per sec.
0 means unrestricted.
You can append K or M(1K = 1024, 1M = 1024K).
Default: 0

.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-torrent\-file\fR=\fITORRENT_FILE\fR
The file path to .torrent file.

.TP
\fB\-\-follow\-torrent\fR=true|false
Setting this option to false prevents aria2 to
enter BitTorrent mode even if the filename of
downloaded file ends with .torrent.
Default: true

.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-show\-files\fR
Print file listing of .torrent file and exit.

.TP
\fB\-\-direct\-file\-mapping\fR=true|false
Directly read from and write to each file
mentioned in .torrent file.
Default: true

.TP
\fB\-\-listen\-port\fR=\fIPORT\fR
Set port number to listen to for peer connection.

.TP
\fB\-\-max\-upload\-limit\fR=\fISPEED\fR
Set max upload speed in bytes per sec.
0 means unrestricted.
You can append K or M(1K = 1024, 1M = 1024K).
Default: 0

.TP
\fB\-\-select\-file\fR=\fIINDEX\fR...
Set file to download by specifing its index.
You can know file index through \fB\-\-show\-files\fR
option. Multiple indexes can be specified by using
\&',' like "3,6".
You can also use '\-' to specify rangelike "1\-5".
\&',' and '\-' can be used together.

.TP
\fB\-\-seed\-time\fR=\fIMINUTES\fR
Specify seeding time in minutes. See also
\fB\-\-seed\-ratio\fR option.

.TP
\fB\-\-seed\-ratio\fR=\fIRATIO\fR
Specify share ratio. Seed completed torrents until
share ratio reaches RATIO. 1.0 is encouraged.
If \fB\-\-seed\-time\fR option is specified along with
this option, seeding ends when at least one of
the conditions is satisfied.

.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-metalink\-file\fR=\fIMETALINK_FILE\fR
The file path to .metalink file.

.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-metalink\-servers\fR=\fINUM_SERVERS\fR
The number of servers to connect to
simultaneously. If more than one connection per
server is required, use \fB\-s\fR option.
Default: 15

.TP
\fB\-\-metalink\-version\fR=\fIVERSION\fR
The version of file to download.

.TP
\fB\-\-metalink\-language\fR=\fILANGUAGE\fR
The language of file to download.

.TP
\fB\-\-metalink\-os\fR=\fIOS\fR
The operating system the file is targeted.

.TP
\fB\-\-follow\-metalink\fR=true|false
Setting this option to false prevents aria2 to
enter Metalink mode even if the filename of
downloaded file ends with .metalink.
Default: true

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print the version number and exit.

.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print this message and exit.

.TP
\fIURL\fR
You can specify multiple URLs. All URLs must point to the same file
or downloading fails.

.TP
\fIFILE\fR
Specify files in multi\-file torrent to download. Use conjunction with
\fB\-T\fR option. This arguments are ignored if you specify \fB\-\-select\-file\fR option.

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.P
Report bugs to <tujikawa at users dot sourceforge dot net>

.SH COPYRIGHT
.P
Copyright (C) 2006 Tatsuhiro Tsujikawa

.P
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

.P
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

.P
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110\-1301 USA


.\" man code generated by txt2tags 2.3 (http://txt2tags.sf.net)
.\" cmdline: txt2tags -t man aria2c.t2t

